   ­
   español
   COVID-19

Emerging from the Great Lockdown in Asia and Europe (BUTTON)

   (BUTTON)

Several countries in Asia and Europe, where the COVID-19 outbreak appears to
--
   To date, over 250,000 people in South and East Asia have been infected,
   and 9,700 have died, with China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore,
   and South Korea accounting for over 85 percent of all infections.

   Following the lockdown in China in late January, and a proactive
   containment effort of testing, tracking, and isolating in Korea, these
   two countries saw new infections peak in February, just when the
   pandemic began to hit Europe hard. The number of confirmed cases of
   COVID-19 in Europe has now reached 1.8 million, representing almost
   half the world's total. The reported death toll stands close to
   160,000, out of more than 280,000 worldwide.

   Economic impact of lockdown measures

   To slow the spread of the virus, most European and Asian countries
   adopted strict lockdowns, the economic impact of which has now become
   evident. China's GDP dropped by 36.6 percent in the first quarter of
   2020, and Korea saw an output decline of 5.5 percent (all rates are
   annualized and seasonally adjusted). The difference in impact reflects
   the fact that China faced the outbreak first and then moved to enforce
   strict lockdown measures, while Korea kept the economy open and
   followed a strategy of more targeted containment (see below).

   In Europe, GDP declined by a record 21.3 percent in France, 19.2
   percent in Spain, and 17.5 percent in Italy in the first quarter of
--
   Europe appears to be more at risk than some Asian countries, including
   China, though no country can confidently declare victory against the
   virus.

   In both Europe and Asia, lockdowns and other restrictions have imposed
   a significant economic and psychological cost on citizens, and their
   desire to roll back these measures and reopen economies is all too
   understandable. However, moving too early and before wide-reaching
   measures to quickly identify and contain new infections are in place
   would put the gains in fighting the spread of COVID-19 at stake and
   risks imposing new human and economic costs. In charting their path out
   of this unprecedented lockdown, the economies in Asia and Europe should
   proceed carefully and resist the urge to do too much too soon and risk
   a relapse.


