
     * Home
     * Advocacy Overview
     * Safe At School®
     * Emergency Lockdown Preparation

   main content start

   Safe at School

Emergency Lockdown Preparation

   Stay prepared for emergency lockdown situations at school. Learn how to
   ensure your child's safety and access to supplies and food in case of a
   lockdown.

   As parents, you know that diabetes management is 24/7. The safety and
   health of your child at school depends on access to care, diabetes
   supplies and equipment. While no one wants the need for a school
   emergency plan to ever be put into action, it is important to work with
   your child's school to develop a plan for how your child's diabetes
   needs will be managed in the rare, horrific event of a school emergency
   or lockdown. Practice emergency drills are becoming the norm in
   schools.

   However, in the unlikely event of a lockdown situation where students
   need to stay in place in the gym, playground, library, classroom or
   other area of the school, it is important to take a few steps to make
   sure your child will have access to needed supplies and food. Schools
   must provide access to care, even in the event of an emergency. While
--
   who have responsibility for your child should understand diabetes –
   including knowing signs of hypoglycemia and how to get help. In
   addition, these school staff should know where your child's supplies
   and food are kept and know how to access in the event of an emergency
   or lockdown.

   Possible considerations for supplies. Ideally, your child should always
   have access to his or meter, insulin, food, water and the restroom.
   Unfortunately, even the best made plans may be altered in the event of
--
   kept with the student at all times to swiftly treat hypoglycemia.

   Insulin. Children with type 1 diabetes and some children with type 2
   need access to their insulin. While the safest practice would be to
   have insulin always accessible, this may be difficult in a lockdown
   situation. If insulin is not available, the plan should be to reduce
   food intake and increase intake of water or non-carbohydrate containing
   liquids. It is important to know the school's plan for accessing
   medication in the event of a rare lockdown or evacuation.

   Written plans and school protocols. It is important to include a
   lockdown/emergency provision in your child's Section 504 Plan or
   Individualized Education Program (IEP). Work with your child's school
   or school district to come up with a safe and practical plan that can
   be incorporated in its lockdown/emergency evacuations protocols and
   easily implemented in the event it is needed.

   Need guidance with a discrimination issue? Or want to learn more about
   the rights of people with diabetes? The ADA can help. Contact
