     * Careers
     * Press
     * Ethics

   Hospital Lockdowns Can Leave Patients' Loved Ones Locked Out Hospitals
   are preparing for how to handle mass shootings in case the next one is
   in their backyard. One difficult call is whether to lockdown the
   facility, which can have emotional consequences.

National

Hospital Lockdowns Can Leave Patients' Loved Ones Locked Out

   July 13, 20185:01 AM ET
   Heard on Morning Edition

--
   By

   Jessica Bakeman

Hospital Lockdowns Can Leave Patients' Loved Ones Locked Out

   Listen · 3:52 3:52
   Transcript (BUTTON) Toggle more options
     * Download
--
   Enlarge this image

   First responders transfer patients from ambulances to Broward Health
   Medical Center in Ft. Lauderdale on the afternoon of Feb. 14. The
   hospital was on lockdown after receiving victims of the shooting at
   Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. Jessica Bakeman/WLRN hide caption
   toggle caption
   Jessica Bakeman/WLRN

   First responders transfer patients from ambulances to Broward Health
   Medical Center in Ft. Lauderdale on the afternoon of Feb. 14. The
   hospital was on lockdown after receiving victims of the shooting at
   Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.
   Jessica Bakeman/WLRN

   On the afternoon of Feb. 14, Fawn Patterson got a call from her
--

Sheriff's Office Reports 17 People Dead In South Florida High School Shooting

   When Patterson got to the hospital, there was a security guard blocking
   the door. The facility was on lockdown after receiving several victims
   from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. Earlier that day, a gunman
   had opened fire at the school — killing 17 people and injuring another
   17.

--

   Patterson was one of dozens of family members and friends waiting
   outside the hospital to see loved ones who were being treated for
   medical concerns unrelated to the school shooting. At one point,
   hospital officials said the lockdown would be in place all night —
   although they ultimately lifted it after five hours.

   Better control

   Hospital administrators in Broward County — and around the country —
   said enhanced security protocols like lockdowns are standard when
   victims of violence are being treated. They argued it's necessary to
   keep all patients and staff safe.
   The Other Victims: First Responders To Violent Disasters Often Suffer
   Alone
--

   But hospital administrators recognize the indirect consequences of mass
   shootings — the far-reaching ripple effects on an entire community —
   like the distress people experience when they're separated from sick
   loved ones during a lockdown.

   "It's a real problem," said Alan Butler, president-elect of the
   International Association for Healthcare Security and Safety.

--
   cars and on foot. Some of the medical centers were not used to treating
   victims of severe trauma.

   One thing hospitals are considering is whether they're too aggressive
   about lockdowns, said Butler, who has been in the health care security
   business for two decades.

   Sponsor Message

   "Sometimes, we stay in these elevated lockdown stages longer than we
   need to," he said.

   Hospitals are also lining up extra staff who they can call in
   specifically to deal with crowds: the people who are there because of
   an emergency and the visitors who would've been there anyway.

   Still, hospital security experts defend lockdowns as an important
   precautionary measure.
   Orlando Hospitals Say They Won't Bill Victims Of Pulse Nightclub
   Shooting

The Two-Way

Orlando Hospitals Say They Won't Bill Victims Of Pulse Nightclub Shooting

   As painful as lockdowns can be for family members, "our first and
   foremost responsibility is treating the patients, and that overrides
   everything," said Bryan Margeson, corporate security manager for
   Orlando Health. His private hospital chain treated victims of the Pulse
   nightclub shooting in June 2016.
--
   her," she said.

   Sponsor Message

   The lockdown began at around 4 p.m. A few hours into it, tensions were
   running high, and people were crowding the entrance of the emergency
   room trying to persuade staff to let them inside the hospital.

   "I have no words. I'm just lost," said Porcha McIntosh. She lives in
--
   and spent the night there with her son. He was released from the
   hospital about three months after his birth. Recently, she said he was
   doing better but was still breathing with a tube in his throat.

   By the time the lockdown lifted at 9 p.m. on Feb. 14, Fawn Patterson
   had already gone home.

   Amanda Ray Carrillo's complications with her pregnancy turned out to be
   not too serious. She was treated and released from the hospital the day
--
     * first responders
     * Emergency Room
     * mass shootings
     * shooting
     * lockdown
     * mass shooting
     * Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School

     * (BUTTON) Facebook
