   underway – relevantly to this question, the consolidation of many
   sectors of the commercial and economic landscape, and the growing
   inequality that will accompany that. Digital technologies will surely
   be more centrally important in most lives than they were before the
   pandemic (even if less than at the height of lockdowns), with the
   resulting increase in the subjection of Americans to surveillance
   capitalism. A new administration – nationally and in several
   currently-red states – could set the stage for regulatory and fiscal
   moves that might soften (even redirect) these forces, but even if we
--
   fabrics in liberal democracies, especially because I don’t know how to
   push back against it.”

   An internet policy researcher said, “More people use will use
   technology after being ‘forced’ to during the lockdown. Not all, but
   more employers will see the benefits of remote working (cost-wise);
   which may reflect both as positive and negative on employees as
   employers expect more availability from workers if they are not in the
   office (working at night, weekends, holidays, etc.). This will reflect
--
   the corporate platforms that own it is melting away. Many of the
   subtleties of how physical spaces and institutions cue social dynamics
   and cultural production could be dulled.”

   HOPES: “The lockdown has already helped many people realize what they
   were always getting out of the built environment, interpersonal
   presence, and civic participation. My hope is that many will return to
   all this with renewed vigor, and that in the process they will learn to
   resist the predations of the attention economy.”
--
   the world, I have observed the impact of cultural inheritance in the
   fight against the pandemic most notably from some Scandinavian
   countries, who despite the steady rise of infections maintained a
   normal flow of life with the consciousness that they were dealing with
   an existential threat while the rest of the world folded into lockdowns
   at different levels of severity. It has not been uncommon to see
   organisations quickly restructure and cause a steep drop in economic
   and social activity throughout an entire nation. Many who did not set
   up plans for chaos management will struggle and eventually fade out
