   a brand new “state of health emergency” was activated in France on the
   23^rd March to cope with a new attack led, this time, by a small and
   invisible enemy, Covid-19. The so-called “state of health emergency”
   currently constitutes the legal framework and basis of the measures in
   force to cope with the epidemic, including nationwide lockdown. What is
   this new regime? Is it a threat to individual freedoms? What are its
   limits and guarantees? Was it legally necessary?

   The latter question is all the more relevant that the French legal
--
   in a closed or open environment and prohibited the access of users to
   childcare establishments and educational and higher education
   establishments.

   As soon as the 16^th March, the nationwide lockdown was decided, and
   put into effect on the next day at noon. Since then, it is prohibited
   for every person to move outside their home, except for one of the
   listed reasons. People wishing to benefit from one of these exceptions
   must provide a “self-permission” document certifying that the trip in
   question falls within the scope of one of these exceptions. This
   lockdown was decided by Governmental Decree 2020-260, signed by the
   Prime Minister, the Health Minister and the Minister of Home Affairs.
   The legal basis of this Decree was, again, Article L3131-1 CSP, which
   was not legally orthodox since, as we have seen, this provision vests
   powers in the Health Minister and not the Prime Minister. This
   deviation from the text, together with the obvious far-reaching effects
   of a nationwide lockdown, probably explains why the Decree also
   mentioned the exceptional circumstances doctrine (“Given the
   exceptional circumstances arising from the covid-19 epidemic”) in its
   recitals. However, this mention was itself somehow unorthodox since it
   is for the judge, and no one else, to decide whether such circumstances
--
       health disaster.

   On the same day, Governmental Decree 2020-293 was adopted on the basis
   of this provision. For the most part, it rolls over, with even further
   restrictions, the content of the two previous lockdown Decrees
   (2020-260 and 2020-279 – see above).

3.2. Procedure and Parliamentary Oversight

--
   fierce guardian of individual freedoms.

   First, on the 22^nd March 2020, upon an application from a doctors
   union for interim measures, it ordered the Government to consider
   aggravating the existing lockdown measures and in particular “review
   the maintenance of the exemption for “short trips, near the home”
   taking into account major public health stakes of the confinement
   order.”

