   (BUTTON) Live
   (BUTTON) Weather
   (BUTTON) Newsletters

Coronavirus: Soldier uses war zone experience to get through lockdown

   21 May 2020
   (BUTTON) Share (BUTTON) Save
   Angie BrownBBC Scotland News
--
   Corporal Alan Fergusson in Kenya after a whole night on exercise

   A Scottish soldier has told how he has drawn from his experience of
   being in war zones in Afghanistan to get through the coronavirus
   lockdown.

   Corporal Alan Fergusson said it was not alien for him to live in a
   small space without being allowed to leave and said he was used to
   being in "unpleasant situations".

   The 38-year-old from 2 SCOTS said people should not be scared of
   coronavirus but instead respect it.

   He said: "You can't live in fear. In this lockdown people need to take
   every day as it comes and realise there is an end point.

   "This lockdown will not last forever so people need to pick something
   they plan to do at the end and focus on that to get them through.

   "I'm focusing on our next deployment to Afghanistan in October as mine.

   "You also have to focus on the little victories you have each day and
   find a hobby you like doing until the lockdown is lifted.

   "I had a terrifying job in Afghanistan and how I made it through each
   day was thinking each night when I was in bed that nobody had died or
   been hurt so it had been a good day. I took it one day at a time."
--
   [grey-placeholder.png] Corporal Alan Fergusson Corporal Alan Fergusson
   Corporal Alan Fergusson

   Corporal Alan Fergusson can only train half the numbers due to social
   distancing rules under lockdown

   When Corporal Fergusson is in a war zone such as Afghanistan he only
   has a house with a small garden to live in for two months with all the
   other soldiers.

   He said: "The lockdown is comparable to operations when we're in
   Afghanistan because there are 40 soldiers in a little compound 100m sq
   and we can't leave or we will be shot.

   "Being in lockdown therefore is not alien to the guys who have been on
   operations and in Iraq the platoon houses are even smaller.

   "So being in a small space is not alien to us.

   "In this lockdown it is hard to see an end point because of the fog of
   covid but it is there and it will end."

   Corporal Fergusson, who has been a Royal Army Medical Corp combat
   medical technician attached to the Second Battalion Royal regiment of
