                    # Emergency Evacuation
                    # Fire
                    # Flood
                    # General Medical Emergencies
                    # Lockdown Procedures
                    # Power Failure
                    # Tornado Warning
               o Emergency Notifications
               o First Aid, CPR, and AED
--
     * About
     * University Police
     * Emergency Management and Preparedness

Lockdown Procedures

Distinction between "Lockdowns" And "Shelter in Place"

Lockdowns

   A lockdown occurs when occupants of the University are directed to
   remain confined to a room/area with specific procedures to follow
   regarding locking of doors, closing of windows/shades, seeking cover,
   etc. This procedure is implemented when a criminal element is believed
   to be on the premises and officials expect that these measures will
   minimize risk exposure of the occupants to the criminal element.
   Lockdowns necessitate a law enforcement response and immediate
   intervention. While responsibility for determining an immediate
   lockdown rests primarily with the University Police, both the
   University officials and law enforcement officials are strongly
   encouraged to confer with one another during this process. This will
   help ensure safe and efficient handling of University lockdown events.

Shelter in Place

   Sheltering in place is similar to lockdown in that the occupants are to
   remain on the premises but may require that they be moved to a
   different part of the University due to an environmental event taking
   place outside of the University. For example, the release of a chemical
   cloud from a nearby incident, power lines down, or a weather related
--
   sheltering them within the University. However, it may be prudent to
   move all of the occupants to another part of the University to further
   minimize the risk of exposure.

   A "lockdown" condition is initiated for weapons related violence,
   usually involving the presence of an emotionally disturbed person or
   persons who are threatening, have committed, or are in the process of
   committing violent acts.

   Lockdown is a baseline plan designed to deny the attacker access to
   potential victims. There is no one magic solution to cover all
   situations and scenarios. Members of the campus community are
   encouraged to "think on their feet." Lockdown applies to everyone:
   faculty, staff, students, administrators, and guests of the University.

   Any member of the campus community who believes weapon-related violence
   is taking place should dial 3111 (or 978.665.3111 from a cell phone)
   immediately.

   Lockdown announcements can be made by Fitchburg State Alert, a
   campus-wide emergency notification system, and by police cruiser public
   announcement (PA) systems, hand-held bullhorns, WEBs Call Boxes, or the
   Official Fitchburg State Social Media Account.

Once a Lockdown order is given:

     * Immediately lock classroom or office door(s).
     * Shut lights off and turn monitors off.
     * Help students remain calm and caution them to remain completely
--
     * Faculty, staff, and students outside should pay attention to the
       police PA system.
     * Keep cover and concealment in mind.
     * If you are attacked directly, scatter.
     * Lockdown protocol supersedes standard fire alarm evacuation
       procedures. Ignore the fire alarm unless evidence of fire is
       apparent (you see smoke or fire). This is a "think on your feet"
       moment.

Police Response:

     * Lockdown buys a handful of minutes for police to take action.
     * Outer perimeter of the campus will be established and secured.
     * Police will arrive and form a contact team.
     * Police will make rapid entry to aggressively address the
       threat--stay out of the way.
--
Situation Resolved:

     * Unlock or evacuation will begin when situation is resolved or
       stabilized.
     * Be prepared for lockdown to last hours.
     * Unlock teams consisting of University Police and other law
       enforcement agencies will open your doors, inspect occupants of the
       room, and give further instructions.
     * Staging areas for medical triage will be established for treating
       injured.

   This lockdown plan remains fluid and may be changed during an
   emergency.
   Falcons, Fly
   Apply
   Visit
