   > News

   News

Lockdown has forced people to live for longer in unsuitable housing

   24 November 2020
     * Visit our twitter page
     * Share on facebook
--

   According to the latest housing report from the Resolution Foundation,
   which used Understanding Society’s COVID-19 data, – age, income and
   ethnicity affected the quality of homes that people have been occupying
   during lockdown.

Key findings

     * Younger age groups have spent lockdown in considerably poorer
       housing conditions than those in older age brackets. Young people
       have less space, are more likely to live in a damp home,  are more
       likely to have no garden, or to live in a derelict or congested
       neighbourhood than older generations.
--
       neighbourhood, than the average 25-34-year-old in the highest
       income bracket. And on average, those aged 55 and older from BAME
       backgrounds occupy homes with 30 percent less useable space than
       their white counterparts.
     * One-in-five children from a low-income household has spent lockdown
       in an overcrowded home, while close to 10 percent are growing up in
       damp conditions. Nearly 40 percent of under-16s from BAME groups
       have no obvious garden, and one-quarter live in an objectively
       poor-quality environment.
--

   Housing conditions have had a stronger effect on well-being during the
   pandemic. Even after controlling for key characteristics such as pay
   and relationship status, the well-being gap between renters and owners
   has widened over the lockdown period.

   The researchers said in the report, “Decent living conditions are not
   just a ‘nice to have’: they have a profound influence on outcomes
   including well-being, an effect this note shows has been amplified
   during the lockdown period. Moreover, the inequalities in living
   conditions we document here are far from natural. Instead, they are the
   product of long-run housing trends such as tenure change, lack of
   building and insufficient regulation of privately rented homes.”

