     * How to Tell if You're Wealthier Than You Think

   IFRAME: about:blank

Lockdown: What It Is, How It Works, Example

   By
   Jason Fernando
   [ld+json] [jason_mugshot__jason_fernando-5bfc261946e0fb00260a1cea.jpg]
--
   Updated April 28, 2025
   Reviewed by Julius Mansa
   (BUTTON) Close
   Definition
   A lockdown, or lockup, is a designated period when certain
   shareholders, such as company insiders, are prohibited from selling
   their stock, often following an initial public offering (IPO).

What Is Lockdown?

   A lockdown, also known as a lockup, is a period of time in which
   holders of a company’s stock are restricted from selling their shares.

Key Takeaways

     * A lockdown is a period of time in which holders of a company’s
       stock are restricted from selling their shares.
     * Lockdown periods typically last 90 to 180 days and while not
       mandatory, they're often requested by IPO underwriters.
     * Lockdowns protect companies from excessive selling pressure
       following their IPO.
     * The period following the expiration of the lockdown can be
       volatile, as holders sell shares and new investors take their
       place.

Understanding Lockdown

   Lockdown restrictions are typically put in place in anticipation of a
   company’s initial public offering (IPO). They generally affect company
   insiders such as founders, executives, and early investors.

   Lockdown periods are an important part of the IPO process. Company
   insiders are often eager to sell their shares following an IPO to cash
   out of their investment. However, too much selling might frighten new
   investors who may interpret it as a lack of faith in the company’s
   future prospects.

   Lockdown periods are a compromise solution that requires insiders to
   wait, typically for 90 to 180 days, before selling their shares.
   Although lockdown periods are not required by law, they are frequently
   requested by underwriters who want to ensure a successful IPO.

Important

   Because underwriters often insist on a lockdown period, investors
   should understand that the lack of selling by insiders during the
   lockdown doesn't necessarily indicate they're confident in the future
   of the company. They may wish to sell but are temporarily prevented
   from doing so.

   The end of the lockdown can be turbulent for investors, because it's
   often associated with increased trading volume. Insiders who are
   finally free to sell their shares may do so, putting downward pressure
   on the share price.

--
   relatively low prices. For some investors, such as pension funds and
   other institutional buyers, this increase in liquidity may make the
   company more attractive.

Lockdown Example

   A notable example of a lockdown period is that of Facebook (FB), which
   completed its IPO in May of 2012 at a price of $38 per share.
   Facebook’s IPO included a 180-day lockdown period which ended in
   November 2012.

   The company’s shares declined to below $20 per share shortly after its
   IPO, but rose above its $38 offer price in the months following the
   expiration of its lockdown period. The shares had gained nearly 10-fold
   by mid-2021.

   Although many insiders sold shares in Facebook following the end of the
   lockdown period, new retail and institutional investors quickly took
   their place. In December 2013, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) announced that
   Facebook would be included in the S&P 500 index. This announcement
   further supported the continued rise of its share price by making the
   shares accessible to exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and other investment
