   (BUTTON) Search ____________________

   chapters

COVID Lockdowns Were a Giant Experiment. It Was a Failure.

A key lesson of the pandemic.

   By Joe Nocera and Bethany McLean
--

   Find this story in your account’s ‘Saved for Later’ section.
   Comment

   [edccb014e8bd3e1bd0b95d2e4b5ea0af10-Covid-Lockdown-06-10-006.rhorizonta
   l.w1100.jpg]

   June 10, 2020, in Williamsburg. Photo: JOHN TAGGART/The New York
   Times/REDUX

   [edccb014e8bd3e1bd0b95d2e4b5ea0af10-Covid-Lockdown-06-10-006.rhorizonta
   l.w1100.jpg]
   June 10, 2020, in Williamsburg. Photo: JOHN TAGGART/The New York
   Times/REDUX

   This article was featured in One Great Story, New York’s reading
   recommendation newsletter. Sign up here to get it nightly.

   On April 8, 2020, the Chinese government lifted its lockdown of Wuhan.
   It had lasted 76 days — two and a half months during which no one was
   allowed to leave this industrial city of 11 million people, or even
   leave their homes. Until the Chinese government deployed this tactic, a
   strict batten-down-the-hatches approach had never been used before to
--
   Health Organization called it “unprecedented in public health history.”

   The word the citizens of Wuhan used to describe their situation was
   fengcheng — “sealed city.” But the English-language media was soon
   using the word lockdown instead — and reacting with horror. “That the
   Chinese government can lock millions of people into cities with almost
   no advance notice should not be considered anything other than
   terrifying,” a China human rights expert told The Guardian. Lawrence O.
   Gostin, a professor of global health law at Georgetown University, told
   the Washington Post that “these kinds of lockdowns are very rare and
   never effective.”

   The Chinese government, however, was committed to this “zero-COVID”
   strategy, as it was called. In mid-March 2020, by which time some 50
   million people had been forced into lockdowns, China recorded its first
   day since January with no domestic transmissions — which it offered as
   proof that its approach was working.  For their part, Chinese citizens
   viewed being confined to their homes as their patriotic duty.

   For the next two years, harsh lockdowns remained China’s default
   response whenever there was an outbreak anywhere in the country. But by
   March 2022, when the government decided to lock down much of Shanghai
   after a rise in cases in that city, there was no more talk of
   patriotism. People reacted with fury, screaming from their balconies,
   writing bitter denunciations on social media, and, in some cases,
   committing suicide. When a fire broke out in an apartment building,
   residents died because the police had locked their doors from the
   outside. And when the Chinese government finally abandoned lockdowns —
   an implicit admission that they had not been successful in eliminating
   the pandemic — there was a wave of COVID-19 cases as bad as anywhere in
   the world. (To be fair, this was partly because China did such a poor
   job of vaccinating its citizens.)

   One of the great mysteries of the pandemic is why so many countries
   followed China’s example. In the U.S. and the U.K. especially,
   lockdowns went from being regarded as something that only an
   authoritarian government would attempt to an example of “following the
   science.” But there was never any science behind lockdowns — not a
   single study had ever been undertaken to measure their efficacy in
   stopping a pandemic. When you got right down to it, lockdowns were
   little more than a giant experiment.
   [edccb014e8bd3e1bd0b95d2e4b5ea0af10-Covid-Lockdown-06-10-006.rhorizonta
   l.w1100.jpg]
   June 16, 2020, in Bloomington, Minnesota. Photo: Kerem Yucel/AFP via
   Getty Images
   [ld+json]
   March 25, 2020, in Chicago. Photo: Taylor Glascock/The New York
   Times/REDUX

   Despite the lack of scientific evidence, lockdowns didn’t come out of
   nowhere, at least not in the U.S. They had been discussed — and argued
   over — by scientists since 2005, when (as the story goes) President
   George W. Bush read John M. Barry’s book The Great Influenza, about the
   1918 pandemic. “This happens every hundred years,” Bush is supposed to
--
   pandemics seriously — without much success. When the Bush
   administration began debating what its pandemic strategy should
   include, it was only natural that Henderson be involved.

   The men Bush chose to lead the effort believed that lockdowns could be
   an important component of a mitigation plan. They were heavily
   influenced by a model developed by Laura Glass, a 14-year-old
   high-school student from Albuquerque (aided by her scientist father),
   that purported to show that keeping people away from one another was as
--
   provided are critical elements. If either is seen as less than optimal,
   a manageable epidemic could move towards catastrophe.”

   The Bush team’s final document, published by the CDC in February 2007,
   stopped short of mandating lockdowns but came as close as its authors
   dared, calling for the use of “social distancing measures to reduce
   contact between adults in the community and workplace.” One of the
   leaders of the effort, a government scientist named Richard Hatchett,
   would later tell Lewis what he really believed: “One thing that’s
--
   their own room and didn’t let them talk to anyone, you would not have
   any disease.”

   Which is true as far as it goes. There were other questions, though,
   that were at least as relevant. Could the kinds of lockdowns that are
   achievable in the real world, where hundreds of millions of people
   can’t live in isolation chambers, be an effective tool against a
   pandemic? Did the virus truly go away during a lockdown or simply hide,
   waiting to reemerge when it ended? And finally, did the many social,
   economic, and medical downsides make them, in the aggregate, not worth
   whatever short-term benefits they might yield?

--
   Unfortunately, there is no shortage of policy failures of which to take
   stock. We do an accounting of many of them in our new book, The Big
   Fail. But one that looms as large as any, and remains in need of a full
   reckoning in the public conversation, is the decision to embrace
   lockdowns. While it is reasonable to think of that policy (in all its
   many forms, across different sectors of society and the 50 states) as
   an on-the-fly experiment, doing so demands that we come to a conclusion
   about the results. For all kinds of reasons, including the country’s
   deep political divisions, the complexity of the problem, and COVID’s
   dire human toll, that has been slow to happen. But it’s time to be
   clear about the fact that lockdowns for any purpose other than keeping
   hospitals from being overrun in the short-term were a mistake that
   should not be repeated. While this is not a definitive accounting of
   how the damage from lockdowns outweighed the benefits, it is at least
   an attempt to nudge that conversation forward as the U.S. hopefully
   begins to recenter public-health best practices on something closer to
   the vision put forward by Henderson.
   [ld+json]
   February 3, 2020, in Wuhan, China. Photo: Stringer/Getty Images

   After China came Italy, the second country to be hit hard by the
   coronavirus. The Italian government responded with a lockdown almost as
   tough as China’s. By the time it was lifted, in early June, 34,000
   Italians had died of COVID-19, up from 630 when the lockdown was first
   imposed.

   Those were frightening numbers. But when Neil Ferguson saw what had
   transpired in Italy, he saw an opportunity. For Ferguson, the head of
   the infectious disease department at Imperial College London, the
   Italian government’s decision to follow China’s example meant that
   lockdowns were suddenly a real-world policy option in Western
   democratic societies, not just in an authoritarian country like China.
   As a disease modeler, he believed the same thing Richard Hatchett
   believed: that if he could lock everyone in a room, the virus would go
   away. But he had long assumed attempting to do so was politically
--
   30 times greater than the maximum supply in both countries.”

   For Ferguson, the purpose of the report wasn’t just to release their
   shocking estimates; it was also to push the American and British
   governments to commit to lockdowns for the long haul. “[T]his type of
   intensive intervention package,” the authors wrote, “will need to be
   maintained until a vaccine becomes available (potentially 18 months or
   more) — given that we predict that transmission will quickly rebound if
   interventions are relaxed.”
   It worked. In the U.K., Prime Minister Boris Johnson had initially
   planned to keep the country open. Instead, he ordered a lockdown within
   a week of Ferguson’s press conference. (Shortly after Johnson imposed
   the lockdown, Ferguson was visited twice by his mistress. For obvious
   reasons, this caused a furor when it was discovered. Ferguson was the
   first, though hardly the last, Establishment bigwig to ignore the
   COVID-19 rules they demanded of everyone else.)

   As for President Donald Trump, he never used the word lockdown, but he
   was worried enough to  call for the country to adopt social distancing
   as a mitigation strategy. Schools, restaurants, businesses — they all
   closed. White-collar employees who were able to work from home did so.
   More than once, Trump mentioned that 2.2 million lives were at stake,
--
   Most governors issued their own “stay-at-home” orders, usually stricter
   than Trump’s. Even Governor Ron DeSantis in Florida — who would soon
   become an outspoken opponent of mainstream mitigation measures —
   reluctantly went along for a brief period. But there were important
   questions that no one advocating for lockdowns addressed, maybe because
   in the urgency of the moment the questions didn’t occur to them. How
   long would they last? And even if lockdowns did slow the virus’s
   progression, what would happen when they were lifted?

   Regardless, in the space of two months, lockdowns had gone from being
   unthinkable to being an unquestioned tool in the pandemic toolkit.
   [ld+json]
   March 17, 2020, in Paris. Photo: Veronique de Viguerie/Getty Images
   [ld+json]
   July 5, 2020, in Melbourne. Photo: Asanka Ratnayake/Getty Images

   When state public health officials explained to the country’s governors
   why lockdowns were necessary, they talked primarily about “bending” or
   “flattening the curve.” And when governors then explained the strategy
   to their constituents, they used the same rationale. “If we change our
   behaviors,” said California governor Gavin Newsom in announcing his
   state’s lockdown on March 19, “we can truly bend the curve to reduce
   the need to surge.” The day after Newsom, then-Governor Andrew Cuomo
   announced a lockdown plan for New York. He called it his PAUSE program
   — Policies Assure Uniform Safety for Everyone — but really, it was the
   same thing.

   What did flattening the curve mean? Here’s what it didn’t mean: It did
--
   flattening the curve meant delaying the virus spread to prevent
   hospitals from becoming overwhelmed with COVID patients. During their
   early press conferences, many governors would display a chart showing a
   sharp increase in the estimated rate of COVID-19 infections. That’s
   what would happen without lockdowns, they explained. Then they would
   display a second chart showing a more gradual upturn once lockdowns and
   other mitigation measures took effect. Simply put, flattening the curve
   was about helping hospitals manage the crisis rather than ending the
   crisis. Even those who later criticized lockdowns largely agreed on
   this point. As David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s COVID-19
   envoy (and an eventual lockdown critic), put it, “The only time we
   believe a lockdown is justified is to buy you time to reorganize,
   regroup, rebalance your resources, protect your health workers who are
   exhausted, but by and large we’d rather not do it.”

   In many blue states, however, that rationale was forgotten over time,
   and many people remained confined to their homes or apartments not just
   for a few weeks but for a year or more — even after the vaccine became
   available. And many of the country’s biggest cities continually
   reimposed lockdowns whenever there was an uptick in COVID cases — not
   just telling people to shelter in place, but also closing small
   businesses and restaurants, outlawing sports events and social
   gatherings, and shutting down in-school learning.

   Which naturally leads to the obvious question: Did lockdowns help keep
   Americans alive? Studies were mixed — in their findings, their
   methodology, even their definition of lockdown. For instance, in August
   2020, eClinicalMedicine, an offshoot of the prestigious British medical
   journal The Lancet, printed a study that concluded that “full lockdowns
   and wide-spread COVID-19 testing were not associated with reductions in
   the number of critical cases or overall mortality.” In March 2021,
   Christian Bjørnskov, an economist at Aarhus University in Denmark,
   compared weekly mortality rates in 24 European countries that used
   mitigation measures with varying degrees of severity. “[T]he findings
   in this paper suggest that more severe lockdown policies have not been
   associated with lower mortality,” the economist wrote. “In other
   words,” he added, “the lockdowns have not worked as intended.”

   Michael Osterholm, the prominent epidemiologist at the University of
   Minnesota, also doesn’t think lockdowns did any good. “There is
   actually no role for lockdowns,” he says. “Look at what happened in
   China. They locked down for years, and when they finally relaxed that
   effort, they had a million deaths in two weeks.” As for flattening the
   curve, “that’s not a real lockdown,” Osterholm says. “You’re just
   reducing contact for a few weeks to help the hospitals.”

   Dr. Anthony Fauci was probably the best-known defender of lockdowns as
   a life-saving measure. But the policy continues to have many defenders
   within the public health establishment. Howard Markel, a doctor and
   medical historian at the University of Michigan, believes they
   succeeded. “The amount of lives saved was just incredible,” he says.
--
   with significant reduction in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, with more
   stringent measures having greater effects.”

   Still, the weight of the evidence seems to be with those who say that
   lockdowns did not save many lives. By our count, there are at least 50
   studies that come to the same conclusion. After The Big Fail went to
   press, The Lancet published a study comparing the COVID infection rate
   and death rate in the 50 states. It concluded that “SARS-CoV-2
   infections and COVID-19 deaths disproportionately clustered in U.S.
   states with lower mean years of education, higher poverty rates,
   limited access to quality health care, and less interpersonal trust —
   the trust that people report having in one another.” These sociological
   factors appear to have made a bigger difference than lockdowns (which
   were “associated with a statistically significant and meaningfully
   large reduction in the cumulative infection rate, but not the
   cumulative death rate”).

--
   patients during March and April of 2020, “our ER was basically empty.”
   He added, “Nobody was coming in because they were afraid of getting
   COVID — or they believed we were only handling COVID patients.”

   So in attempting to gauge the value of lockdowns, the most appropriate
   way is to look not just at COVID deaths but at all deaths during the
   pandemic years. That’s known as the “excess deaths” — a measure of how
   many more people died than in a normal year. One authoritative
   accounting was compiled by The Spectator using data gathered by the
--
   Sweden — one of the few countries that had refused to lock down its
   society — it was just 4 percent. An analysis by Bloomberg found broadly
   similar results. In other words, for all the criticism Sweden
   shouldered from the world’s public health officials for refusing to
   institute lockdowns, it wound up seeing a lower overall death rate
   during the pandemic than most peer nations that shut down schools and
   public gatherings. It is not unreasonable to conclude from the
   available data that the lockdowns led to more overall deaths in the
   U.S. than a policy that resembled Sweden’s would have.
   [ld+json]
   March 20, 2020, in Los Angeles. Photo: AGUSTIN PAULLIER/AFP via Getty
   Images

   There were other negative consequences too. In the U.S., lockdowns
   forced hundreds of thousands of small business closures. They
   exacerbated inequality, as Amazon warehouse workers and meatpackers
   showed up to crowded workplaces while the “Zoom class” locked down at
   home. Worst of all, though, it had a devastating effect on children
   whose schools were closed as part of a lockdown. During the first weeks
   of the pandemic it probably made sense to close schools given how
   little was known about the coronavirus. Better safe than sorry. But by
   the time school started up again in the fall of 2020, two things were
   clear. The first was that remote learning was a disaster. The second
--
   Teachers gave up trying to prod those who didn’t log onto their remote
   classes. Plus, teachers had kids of their own to take care of, which
   made it difficult to teach.

   The anti-lockdown scientist Jay Bhattacharya of Stanford University
   recalls a photograph in the San Jose Mercury News during the early
   months of the pandemic. It showed two children, 7 or 8 years old,
   sitting with Google Chromebooks outside a Taco Bell. “They were on the
   sidewalk doing schoolwork because that was the only place they could
   get free Wi-Fi,” Bhattacharya said. “Their parents weren’t there
   because they had to go to work. I mean, that should have ended the
   lockdown right then and there. It should have at least ended school
   closures.”

   Public schools have an importance that goes beyond education. It’s
   where many of the rituals of childhood and young adulthood take place.
   For children who live in unstable homes, school offers some stability.
   Public schools serve free breakfast and lunch to disadvantaged kids.
   And they’re a place where parents know their children are safe when
   they’re at work. One consequence of lockdowns was that millions of
   children had to fend for themselves because their parents couldn’t
   afford to quit their jobs to take care of them.

   One child psychiatrist, who works with underprivileged autistic kids,
   began the pandemic believing in the importance of lockdowns and other
   mitigation measures. But over time, she changed her mind.

   “What really drove me was my clinical experience,” she said. “What
   happens to a child when every single support is removed from them?
   What’s the impact on the family and the siblings? What I was seeing was
   complete regression. It was devastating, and the downsides of lockdowns
   and school closings were not being openly discussed in the mainstream
   media. I was horrified. Why aren’t we talking about this?” She
   described the situation she saw as 2022 wore on as a “sickening
   mental-health crisis.”
--
   One such person was Anthony Fauci. In August 2022, Fauci announced that
   he planned to retire at the end of the year. Over the next few months,
   he made the rounds to discuss how the country had fared during the
   pandemic. Invariably, he was asked whether he regretted his forceful
   advocacy of lockdowns, especially given its effect on children. At one
   forum, he said, “Sometimes when you do draconian things, it has
   collateral negative consequences … on the economy, on the
   schoolchildren.” But, he added, “The only way to stop something cold in
   its tracks is to try and shut things down.”
--
     * newsletter pick
     * chapters
     * covid-19
     * public health
     * lockdowns
     * one great story
     * More

   Show Comment

   COVID Lockdowns Were a Giant Experiment. It Was a Failure.

   Things you buy through our links may earn Vox Media a commission.

   (BUTTON) Sign In to Comment
