
   IMF Blog Logo
   (BUTTON)
     * Chart of the Week
     * Regions
     * Topics
     * Authors
     * Archive
     * IMF Home

   Credit (photo: Shepherd Zhou/FeatureChina/Newscom)

   Credit (photo: Shepherd Zhou/FeatureChina/Newscom)
   (BUTTON) English
   français
   português
   russkij
   ¥¬
   a+l+e+r+b+y+tm
   ­
   español
   COVID-19

Emerging from the Great Lockdown in Asia and Europe (BUTTON)

   (BUTTON)

Several countries in Asia and Europe, where the COVID-19 outbreak appears to
have peaked, are gradually reopening their economies.

   Poul M. Thomsen
   May 12, 2020

   Without a vaccine or effective treatment, policymakers will be
   balancing the benefits of resuming economic activity against the
   potential cost of another increase in infection rates. They face
   difficult choices, in part, because the costs of erring in either
   direction could be very large.

   The timing, sequencing, and pace of the planned exits differ across
   countries.

   Given this, authorities are adopting a gradual and sequenced approach
   to reopening, along with the adoption of further prevention and
   containment measures. While some Asian countries have already moved
   down this path with some success, risks remain--and the risks for
   Europe may be even greater. How do unlocking strategies compare across
   Asia and Europe?

   The COVID-19 pandemic hit Asia first. It quickly spread from China to
   others in the region and has yet to retreat from all those countries.
   To date, over 250,000 people in South and East Asia have been infected,
   and 9,700 have died, with China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore,
   and South Korea accounting for over 85 percent of all infections.

   Following the lockdown in China in late January, and a proactive
   containment effort of testing, tracking, and isolating in Korea, these
   two countries saw new infections peak in February, just when the
   pandemic began to hit Europe hard. The number of confirmed cases of
   COVID-19 in Europe has now reached 1.8 million, representing almost
   half the world's total. The reported death toll stands close to
   160,000, out of more than 280,000 worldwide.

   Economic impact of lockdown measures

   To slow the spread of the virus, most European and Asian countries
   adopted strict lockdowns, the economic impact of which has now become
   evident. China's GDP dropped by 36.6 percent in the first quarter of
   2020, and Korea saw an output decline of 5.5 percent (all rates are
   annualized and seasonally adjusted). The difference in impact reflects
   the fact that China faced the outbreak first and then moved to enforce
   strict lockdown measures, while Korea kept the economy open and
   followed a strategy of more targeted containment (see below).

   In Europe, GDP declined by a record 21.3 percent in France, 19.2
   percent in Spain, and 17.5 percent in Italy in the first quarter of
   2020 (also annualized and seasonally adjusted). The second quarter is
   bound to be even worse.

   How Asia is restarting economic activity

   As containment measures proved effective in curbing the epidemic, a few
   Asian countries are already well down the path to reopening.

   In China, the number of reported new infections has stabilized at very
   low levels. Since mid-February, the government has been reopening the
   economy in a gradual, sequenced manner. It has prioritized essential
   sectors, specific industries, regions, and population groups based on
   continuous risk assessments. Meanwhile it has also been leveraging
   digitalization, big data and technology to support contact tracing.

   Crucially, the effort has been complemented by large-scale testing,
   including the start of randomized screening in select provinces, and
   systematic tracking via mobile phone apps to rapidly trace the contacts
   of any new positive cases. This has been accompanied by restrictions on
   movement and other control measures on infected people and their
   contacts. So far, the reopening in China has unfolded without a
   debilitating second wave of infections, but this may yet change as
   activity normalizes further.

   Korea also encountered the virus early in the global wave and put in
   place a swift and well-organized containment effort. This was based on
   large-scale testing, mandatory isolation of detected and at-risk cases,
   and widespread use of digitalization and technology for contact
   tracing. This effort was combined with the closure of schools and
   public facilities; comprehensive guidance on social distancing, and
   quarantine measures for travelers.

   However, domestic mobility and business activity were never widely
   restricted in Korea. As a result, the resumption of economic activity
   is proceeding gradually, and more or less automatically as social
   distancing recedes. The authorities have transitioned to less stringent
   guidelines for "Daily Social Distancing," which directs citizens to
   stay home when feeling ill, keep personal distance, wash hands
   frequently, wear face masks, and ventilate indoor spaces regularly.

   Singapore also succeeded in containing the contagion early on following
   a strategy similar to Korea's. But, in early April, it tightened
   containment measures in response to a new outbreak.

   Europe's gradual reopening

   Several European countries have announced plans to gradually reopen
   their economies and some have already begun the process. The timing,
   sequencing, and pace of the planned exits differ across countries,
   reflecting differences in the progress of the epidemic but also
   national preferences (see below).

   For example, Denmark and Norway have started by reopening lower schools
   and services, while Spain has lifted restrictions in manufacturing and
   construction, as well as for some small businesses, including retail,
   with safety measures. Germany has lifted restrictions on retail shops
   and is gradually re-opening schools, with the relaxation subject to a
   break mechanism allowing for re-tightening if needed. Italy has
   reopened manufacturing and construction (under strict safety rules) and
   select small stores. France has just allowed the reopening of primary
   schools, shops, and industry, on a differentiated regional basis, as of
   May 11.

   Sweden stands out with its distinctive approach, and its decision not
   to fully lock down activity. It is too early to tell whether this
   strategy will prove more effective.

   All countries envisage using health and social distancing measures to
   mitigate the risk of a new wave of contagion, but they vary by type and
   intensity.

   Unlocking Asia and Europe: looking ahead

   While reopening strategies differ, Europe appears to be reopening its
   economy earlier in the epidemic cycle than China. In addition, the
   capacity for large-scale testing, contact tracing, and case isolation
   in Europe may lag behind the best examples in Asia-partly reflecting
   stringent privacy rules. For instance, the European Commission
   recommends tracking apps, but only on a voluntary basis. Consequently,
   Europe appears to be more at risk than some Asian countries, including
   China, though no country can confidently declare victory against the
   virus.

   In both Europe and Asia, lockdowns and other restrictions have imposed
   a significant economic and psychological cost on citizens, and their
   desire to roll back these measures and reopen economies is all too
   understandable. However, moving too early and before wide-reaching
   measures to quickly identify and contain new infections are in place
   would put the gains in fighting the spread of COVID-19 at stake and
   risks imposing new human and economic costs. In charting their path out
   of this unprecedented lockdown, the economies in Asia and Europe should
   proceed carefully and resist the urge to do too much too soon and risk
   a relapse.


   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/1RgrSxlVsN4

Recent Blogs

   Healing the Pandemic's Economic Scars Demands Prompt Action
   COVID-19
   A

Healing the Pandemic's Economic Scars Demands Prompt Action

   May 17, 2022
   Pandemic's E-commerce Surge Proves Less Persistent, More Varied
   COVID-19

Pandemic's E-commerce Surge Proves Less Persistent, More Varied

   March 17, 2022
   Rethinking Fiscal Policy and Debt for a Post-Pandemic World
   COVID-19

Rethinking Fiscal Policy and Debt for a Post-Pandemic World

   March 2, 2022

ABOUT THE BLOG

   IMFBlog is a forum for the views of the International Monetary Fund
   (IMF) staff and officials on pressing economic and policy issues of the
   day. The IMF, based in Washington D.C., is an organization of 191
   countries, working to foster global monetary cooperation and financial
   stability around the world. The views expressed are those of the
   author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF and its
   Executive Board. Read More
     * ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
     * DIGITAL MONEY
     * FINANCIAL SECTOR STABILITY

     * GLOBAL ECONOMY
     * FINANCIAL MARKET
     * FISCAL AFFAIRS

     * MONETARY POLICY
     * PEOPLE
     * IMF HOME PAGE

   © 2025 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
