    #JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

     * Products
          + Software
               o Desktop App
               o Mobile App
          + Hardware
               o Big Green Button
               o Mini Green Button
     * Sectors
          + Enterprise
          + Healthcare
          + Education
          + Government
     * About us
          + The Company
          + The Team
          + Newsroom
     * Pricing

   Portal Login
   Contact
   Start your free trial

   an aerial view of a brick built school with a large car park and
   grounds.

   Jul 22, 2025 | Education, News - Featured

School Lockdown Procedures: Best Practice, Safety Tips and Implementation
Guidance

   Lockdown and intruder situations are becoming more common in schools.
   At Little Green Button, we’re seeing an increase in demand for
   solutions to deal with these emergencies. This is in line with recent
   reports that 88% of schools are investing in security measures to
   prevent crime in and around their premises.

   While the risk of an incident involving an intruder looking to cause
   harm in any school is very low, it’s still vital that every school in
   the UK has a clear, well-practised lockdown procedure in place and has
   the tools to implement it swiftly and safely.

   With the Terrorism (Protection of Premises) Bill, known as Martyn’s
   Law, due to come into force in 2027, schools will be expected to place
   even more focus on emergency planning, risk awareness and response.
   While schools aren’t considered to be among the highest-risk venues,
   the principles of this new legislation already align with Ofsted’s
   expectations for safeguarding and site security.

   In this guide, we’ll explore the practical steps schools can take to
   put an effective lockdown procedure in place. From assessing your site
   for vulnerabilities to choosing the right alert system, we’ll guide you
   through the key considerations for keeping pupils, staff and visitors
   safe during a lockdown or invacuation situation.

   Contents:
     * What is a school lockdown and why should you have a lockdown
       procedure?
     * What does Ofsted say about lockdown procedures?
     * Martyn’s Law: How it relates to schools
     * How to create a lockdown procedure
     * Why a lockdown alert system should be part of your lockdown
       procedure
     * How Little Green Button can help

What is a school lockdown and why should you have a lockdown procedure?

   A school lockdown, often referred to as a school security lockdown in
   government documents, is when there is a threat to pupils, staff and
   visitors that means it’s safer for them to remain in a school building,
   and are therefore directed to stay there and shelter as far away from
   the threat as possible.

   Situations when a lockdown may be used include:
     * When an intruder is seen on the school grounds or in the building
     * When a violent or abusive parent/carer is causing trouble
     * When a threat has been made against the school

   You may have also heard of the term ‘invacuation’. A lockdown is
   similar to an invacuation, but they are used in different
   circumstances. While a lockdown is used when there is the risk of
   immediate harm to pupils, staff or visitors, an invacuation is used
   when there is danger outside the school that needs to be avoided.

   Invacuations can be useful in situations such as:
     * Loose animals on school grounds
     * Gas, smoke or other chemical pollution in the area
     * Any incident near the school which has the potential to cause harm
       if pupils, staff or visitors leave the building

   Every school should have a lockdown and invacuation procedure in place
   that clearly states the steps that staff must take to protect pupils,
   visitors and themselves from any threat. Ofsted requires all schools to
   have a security lockdown procedure, while the Terrorism (Protection of
   Premises) Bill which comes into force in 2027 aims to ensure that
   publicly accessible venues have plans in place to protect the public
   from terrorist threats.

What does Ofsted say about lockdown procedures?

   an empty classroom with large windows and a circular desk in the
   middle. an empty classroom with large windows and a circular desk in
   the middle.

   Ofsted’s guidance on lockdown procedures is vague, and many unions such
   as NASUWT argue that there should be much more advice available to
   headteachers.

   Ofsted states that every school should have a security lockdown plan,
   and it is the responsibility of the headteacher or delegated member of
   staff to judge the level of response required during a security
   incident.

   Right now, Ofsted inspectors do not advocate for the need for lockdown
   alarms in schools, despite some online sources reporting that they do.
   The school inspection handbook only states that they expect schools to
   meet the requirements of the Keeping children safe in education
   guidance.

   However, we think that Ofsted and the Department for Education should
   go further and require a lockdown alarm system to be in place in order
   to protect students and staff.

   Currently, many schools rely on their fire alarm system, which can
   often produce visual-only alarms. But we think this is dangerous – fire
   alarms signal evacuation, whereas in a lockdown situation it’s crucial
   that staff and pupils stay put.

Martyn’s Law: How it relates to schools

   The Terrorism (Protection of Premises) Bill, more commonly known as
   Martyn’s Law, was created in memory of Martyn Hett, one of the victims
   of the 2017 Manchester Arena attack. This legislation is due to come
   into force in 2027 and will place new duties on publicly accessible
   venues to consider the threat of terrorism and put appropriate
   protective measures in place.

   While most schools are not considered high-risk venues under the
   current classification of the bill, the core principles of Martyn’s Law
   still apply. These include:
     * Risk awareness: Understanding potential threats and being able to
       recognise suspicious behaviour or activity.
     * Emergency planning: Having clear, documented procedures in place to
       respond to different types of incidents.
     * Rapid response: Ensuring that all staff know what to do in the
       event of an emergency and can act quickly to protect pupils.

   Ofsted has already started to align with these principles in its
   inspection framework. Having a school lockdown procedure is a clear way
   to demonstrate that your school takes its duty of care seriously – and
   helps ensure you’re prepared for a range of incidents, not just
   terrorism.

How to create a lockdown procedure

   If your school doesn’t yet have a formal lockdown plan in place, now is
   the time to act.

   We’ve spoken to some of our customers in the education sector and
   interpreted NASUWT guidance to come up with these guidelines for
   creating a lockdown procedure.

   This is for informational purposes only. Please ensure you liaise with
   your local authority, unions, and other relevant bodies to help
   finalise your lockdown procedure.

1. Conduct a vulnerability assessment

   two sets of hands observing a building plan. two sets of hands
   observing a building plan.

   Begin by identifying the specific risks that your school could face.
   This might include intruders, violent or aggressive individuals or
   incidents happening in the local area. Consider different times of the
   school day, such as break times or drop-off, when pupils may be more
   dispersed across the site.

   NASUWT recommends carrying out a vulnerability assessment of your
   school’s buildings and grounds using a traffic light system. It can be
   useful to put yourself in the position of the attacker while you do
   this.

   Using a plan of your school’s grounds, walk around the school and
   consider how an attacker might carry out an attack, and where the
   easiest places to gain access are. Highlight areas of the school in
   red, amber or green depending on how vulnerable they are to attack –
   with red being the most vulnerable.

2. Do a space assessment

   Hopefully, once you’ve assessed each area, you’ll have some highlighted
   in green. These areas should be the most likely to provide protection,
   or are difficult to find.

   Do a space assessment in each area, allowing around half a metre
   squared per person to calculate how many people you can fit in the
   area. If you don’t have enough space in the green areas, you may have
   to consider using some of the safer amber ones too.

   You should consider the following things when deciding on the areas to
   be used:
     * Try to move people short distances, as longer routes can lead to
       panic
     * The routes to safe areas also need to be safe, so don’t take people
       outside to move back inside to a safe area
     * People should be kept informed every few minutes when they are
       sheltering in these areas – this is where an alert system like
       Little Green Button can be useful
     * Ideally, there should be toilets and water facilities nearby
     * NASUWT suggests that classes that know and work together are best
       kept together to lower stress

3. Write your lockdown procedure

   Now you know where you can safely accommodate people during a lockdown,
   it’s time to write your lockdown procedure.

   Your procedure should be simple enough to follow under stress and
   flexible enough to work during different parts of the school day, such
   as pupil arrival, break times or after-school clubs.

   There are three key principles to consider when writing your procedure:
   time, control and simplicity.

Time

   Time is of the essence in a lockdown situation. Just like in a fire,
   the sooner people are made aware of the incident, the faster they can
   respond. That’s why schools should consider using a dedicated lockdown
   alert system that is clearly distinguishable from the fire alarm to
   avoid confusion.

   Ideally, a panic alarm should be placed in vulnerable (red) areas such
   as entrances, the main office or reception. If you also use a PA system
   or internal messaging, this can help qualify the alert and direct staff
   to take the appropriate action.

   At Little Green Button, we recommend a customisable lockdown alert that
   can be triggered discreetly via desktop, mobile or a physical button,
   and which can send different types of alerts to the right responders
   immediately.

Control

   Without clear leadership, lockdown situations can quickly become
   chaotic. Every school should nominate an incident controller to take
   charge when a lockdown is triggered. To ensure someone is always
   available, at least three trained individuals should be appointed and
   rotated depending on availability. These roles may be filled by members
   of SLT or other trained staff who are regularly on site.

   To improve communication, consider issuing a pager or a designated
   mobile phone to the duty controller each day. The controller should
   have access to key tools such as the PA system, CCTV, and any lockdown
   alert technology. Ideally, this would be done from a control room or
   protected office. If your current control setup is located in a
   vulnerable area, you may want to explore cost-effective ways to upgrade
   security or set up duplicate facilities elsewhere on site.

Simplicity

   Procedures must be kept clear and easy to follow. In the middle of a
   high-stress incident, complicated or vague steps can lead to delays or
   mistakes. Use plain language and break down the steps for different
   groups, such as class teachers, support staff and admin staff.

   One effective approach is to build your lockdown procedure on top of
   your existing fire marshal system. Fire marshals already have
   responsibility for guiding and accounting for pupils during fire
   evacuations, so with a small amount of additional training, they can be
   equipped to support lockdown scenarios too.

   Regular practise will help staff feel more confident in their roles
   during a real incident. Keep procedures short, action-focused, and
   revisit them after drills or policy reviews.

4. Regular practise and drills

   There’s no specific legal requirement to conduct lockdown drills in
   schools, but it’s considered best practice by both Ofsted and
   government safeguarding guidance.

   Drills should be held at least once a year, and after any significant
   change to your policy or procedures. Ensure all new staff are trained
   in your lockdown procedures as part of their induction.

Why a lockdown alert system should be part of your lockdown procedure

   A clear, unmistakable way to alert staff to a lockdown situation is
   critical. Many schools rely on their fire alarm systems to signal
   emergencies, but this can create confusion. Fire alarms tell staff and
   pupils to evacuate. A lockdown alarm must do the opposite: instruct
   them to stay inside and take shelter.

   The National Counter Terrorism Security Office (NaCTSO) specifically
   advises against using fire alarms during lockdown events, as they can
   lead to the wrong response and place staff and pupils in danger.

   Instead, schools should install a dedicated lockdown alert system that:
     * Notifies staff immediately without causing panic among pupils
     * Can be triggered from different areas of the school
     * Clearly distinguishes a lockdown from other types of emergency

How Little Green Button can help

   a woman sitting at a desk with her monitor showing the little green
   button panic alarm software. a woman sitting at a desk with her monitor
   showing the little green button panic alarm software. Little Green
   Button provides a simple, effective lockdown alert system and panic
   button for schools. Our panic alarm software runs on computers, tablets
   and mobiles, and can be triggered by a physical Big Green Button,
   allowing staff to call for help or initiate a lockdown at the click of
   a button.

   You can configure Little Green Button to send different types of alerts
   to different groups, such as lockdowns to all staff, or medical
   emergencies to first aiders, and track how incidents unfold in real
   time via the alert timeline.
     * Staff can raise the alarm quickly and discreetly from anywhere in
       the school
     * Alerts are sent to designated teams immediately, helping you
       initiate a swift, coordinated response
     * Use the system in drills to reinforce best practice and ensure
       staff are confident in what to do

   “We have seen a significant increase in demand for lockdown and
   intruder protection following a rise in abusive incidents against
   staff,” says Alex Jay, Little Green Button CEO.

   “Nearly 40% of teachers have been the victim of an abusive incident in
   the last 12 months according to teacher’s union NASUWT, and Little
   Green Button is there to support them and help mitigate the risk and
   improve safety outcomes.”

   Whether you’re responding to Martyn’s Law, preparing for Ofsted, or
   simply doing what’s right for your pupils and staff, having a clear
   lockdown procedure and alert system in place is essential.

   Want to see how Little Green Button could support your school’s
   lockdown planning?
   Get in touch with our team today to arrange a demo or start a free
   trial.

Find out how Little Green Button can support your safety setup

   Contact Us

     * Podcast
     * Vacancies
     * Partnerships
     * Support
     * Downloads
     * FAQ
     * Contact

   © Copyright 2022 | Little Green Button Ltd | Company reg no. 11668338 |
   Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | Carbon Reduction Plan | Modern
   Slavery Statement | Website design by Finch Design Company and Example
   Marketing & Web Design
   Trustpilot
   
   
   
   
