    #The Globe Post ГӮВ» Feed The Globe Post ГӮВ» Comments Feed The Globe Post ГӮВ»
   UkraineГўВҖВҷs Lost Generation Caught in ГўВҖВҳEternal LockdownГўВҖВҷ Comments Feed
   JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

     * About Us
     * Who Are We
     * Work With Us

   Saturday, January 3, 2026
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   The Globe Post
   39 ГӮВ°f
   New York
   44 ГӮВ° Fri
   46 ГӮВ° Sat
   40 ГӮВ° Sun
   41 ГӮВ° Mon
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   The Globe Post
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   Home Featured

UkraineГўВҖВҷs Lost Generation Caught in ГўВҖВҳEternal LockdownГўВҖВҷ

   Staff Writer with AFP by Staff Writer with AFP
   12/17/25
   in Featured, World
   Ukraine war

   An Ukranian soldier walks in Mala Rogan, east of Kharkiv, after
   Ukrainians reclaimed the village. Photo: Aris Messinis/AFP
   Share on FacebookShare on Twitter

   With his shadow of a moustache and baseball cap, Bogdan Levchikov would
   be your typical teenager anywhere if he didnГўВҖВҷt embody the tragedy of
   what has happened to a generation of young Ukrainians after nearly four
   years of war.

   His father Stanislav, a career soldier, was killed defending the
   countryГўВҖВҷs second city Kharkiv just weeks after Russia invaded in 2022.
   On top of all they have been through, his mother Iryna, 50, was
   recently diagnosed with stage-three cancer of the uterus.

   Bogdan no longer knows anyone his age in his battered hometown of
   Balakliya, which was occupied by the Russian army from March to
   September 2022. It was later retaken by Ukrainian forces, but being
   only 70 kilometers (43 miles) from the front, is still regularly
   shelled.

   ГўВҖВңMy mother and I came back a few days after the city was liberated, and
   there were no children left, no shops open, nothing,ГўВҖВқ he recalled. Only
   a fraction of the pre-war population of 26,000 have trickled back, and
   most of them are old.

   The skate park and the banks of the Balakliyka River where young people
   used to hang out were mined by the Russians. They have been demined
   since, ГўВҖВңbut rumour has it itГўВҖВҷs still not safe,ГўВҖВқ the 15-year-old said.

   All BogdanГўВҖВҷs schooling is online, his days punctuated by air raid
   alerts. The nine flights of stairs down to the basement is more than
   his sick mother can manage, so they lay a mattress in the small entry
   to their apartment, the only room without a window. ГўВҖВңWeГўВҖВҷve gotten used
   to getting by on our own. WeГўВҖВҷre a tight team,ГўВҖВқ Bogdan smiled.

   ГўВҖВңItГўВҖВҷs not just Bogdan. All the children adapted so quickly,ГўВҖВқ his mother
   said. ГўВҖВңThis generation ГўВҖВ“ I donГўВҖВҷt know what to make of themГўВҖВҰГўВҖВқ

   She is not the only one to wonder what the war has done to UkraineГўВҖВҷs
   children.

   Nearly a million young Ukrainians are still living in an eternal
   lockdown, doing either all or part of their lessons online. First there
   was the pandemic in March 2020, then the invasion ГўВҖВ“ six years of
   spending most of their time in front of the family computer to study
   and unwind.

   This isolation is particularly felt in the Kharkiv region bordering
   Russia, which is the target of daily attacks.

   A few bars and restaurants stay open until the 11 pm curfew before
   night brings the inevitable Russian drone and missile attacks. Mornings
   echo with the sound of volunteer teams repairing whatever can be
   salvaged.

   Some 843 educational establishments have been either destroyed or
   damaged in the region ГўВҖВ“ a fifth of the national toll, according to the
   Ukrainian governmentГўВҖВҷs saveschools.in.ua. site.

   The online investigative site Bellingcat ГўВҖВ“ with whom AFP journalists in
   Kyiv and Paris worked on this special report ГўВҖВ“ has logged more than 100
   video or photo testimonies on social media of Russian strikes on or
   close to educational institutions or youth leisure facilities in and
   around Kharkiv.

   Children in tears were evacuated when a city centre daycare was hit on
   October 22. ГўВҖВңWeГўВҖВҷre going to find your mother right away,ГўВҖВқ a rescuer
   told a little girl he was carrying out of the smoke and debris,
   according to police footage.

Underground Schools

   More and more children are going to underground schools in the city.
   Yevangelina Tuturiko has been attending one since September, several
   meters below the street with no natural light.

   ГўВҖВңI really love it,ГўВҖВқ the lanky 14-year-old said, ГўВҖВңbecause I can talk in
   person with my classmates again.ГўВҖВқ

   Ironically, Yevangelina had to cross Europe to ГўВҖВңmeet most of my current
   friendsГўВҖВқ in Kharkiv after being invited on a ГўВҖВңrespite tripГўВҖВқ organised
   by the city of Lille in northern France to give Ukrainian kids a taste
   of normality.

   Kharkiv will have 10 underground schools open by the end of the year,
   the city hall said.

   Priority is given to classes where most of the children remained in
   Kharkiv during the heaviest of the fighting at the start of the
   invasion, when Russian forces pushed into the suburbs of the city. Some
   70 percent of the cityГўВҖВҷs children were evacuated at one time or
   another, either abroad or to the west of Ukraine.

   The children spend only half their school day in the bunkers to make
   room for others, finishing their classes online.

   The school AFP visited was built to nuclear shelter standards, with a
   heavy armored door. ГўВҖВңWe are probably one of the safest shelters in all
   of Ukraine,ГўВҖВқ its principal Natalia Teplova said proudly.

ГўВҖВҳChildren Going MadГўВҖВҷ

   All outdoor school sports are banned in the Kharkiv region for fear of
   Russian strikes. But outside school itГўВҖВҷs a little more hazy.

   ГўВҖВңOfficial competitions are banned, but weГўВҖВҷre not state-run, so we make
   do on our own,ГўВҖВқ said football coach and former soldier Oleksandr
   Andrushchenko as he roared on his young players.

   The handful of well-wrapped up parents on the sidelines ГўВҖВңunderstand
   that their children havenГўВҖВҷt developed at all (athletically) since the
   Covid years. And that itГўВҖВҷs better for them to play footballГўВҖВҰ than stay
   glued to their phones,ГўВҖВқ he said.

   Inside KharkivГўВҖВҷs largest swimming pool complex, educator Ayuna Morozova
   agrees: ГўВҖВңYou canГўВҖВҷt live in constant fear.ГўВҖВқ

   The huge Soviet-era brutalist building shut after being hit in two
   heavy strikes in March 2022, then reopened in May 2024. Now when
   windows are blown out from the shock waves of nearby bombing, they are
   just boarded up with plywood or plastic.

   ГўВҖВңWater and swimming cure everything,ГўВҖВқ Morozova firmly believes. ГўВҖВңFirst
   two years of Covid, then four years of war ГўВҖВ“ children are going mad,ГўВҖВқ
   she said. The complex is now also home to a water therapy space for
   amputee soldiers.

   With her flame-red hair and warm manner, Ayuna lives up to her
   Tatar-origin first name, which means ГўВҖВңGreat BearГўВҖВқ. But like almost
   everyone AFP met, the wounds of war surface quickly. She was buried
   under rubble after an airstrike on a public building in 2022. ГўВҖВңI still
   have nightmares,ГўВҖВқ she said. ГўВҖВңI avoid confined spaces and lifts. And
   yes, I did see a psychologist.ГўВҖВқ

   Ukraine lacks the resources to measure the warГўВҖВҷs impact on the young.

   ГўВҖВңWe donГўВҖВҷt have enough psychologists,ГўВҖВқ admitted Oksana Zbitnieva, head
   of the governmentГўВҖВҷs coordination center for mental health. To try to
   make up for that, ГўВҖВң130,000 frontline health professionals ГўВҖВ” nurses,
   pediatricians, family doctors ГўВҖВ“ have received World Health
   Organization-certified training in mental health,ГўВҖВқ she said.

   While ГўВҖВңsome countries have been building their (mental health) systems
   for 50 years, we were the last to get started because of our Soviet
   legacy,ГўВҖВқ she added.

   The government has opened 326 ГўВҖВңresilience centersГўВҖВқ for children and
   parents across the country, and ГўВҖВң300 moreГўВҖВқ should be built next year,
   according to Social Affairs Minister Denys Uliutin.

Self-Harm

   When AFP met psychologist Maryna Dudnyk amid the sunflower fields of
   Khorosheve, south of Kharkiv, she had just led three hours of play
   workshops with around 50 children aged six to 11 to help them express
   their feelings.

   As her team packed away the bulletproof vests ГўВҖВ“ security protocol
   demands they bring them ГўВҖВ“ she said ГўВҖВңthe war has had a huge impact on
   the emotional state of young people, we all live under stress.ГўВҖВқ

   In her consulting room, she hears ГўВҖВңa lot of fear and anxiety in
   childrenГўВҖВҰ Teenagers suffer from self-harm, from suicidal thoughts.ГўВҖВқ

   Dudnyk, 50, who works for the Ukrainian NGO ГўВҖВңVoices of ChildrenГўВҖВқ, also
   carries her own wounds ГўВҖВ“ fleeing from her hometown Mariupol, which was
   occupied by the Russian army after a brutal siege. ГўВҖВңWe no longer have a
   home, nothing. Everything was destroyed.ГўВҖВқ

   Some teenagers have grown a kind of emotional armour. Illia Isayev
   hated it when his family fled the fighting by crossing over into
   Russia. The months they spent there before returning made him even more
   of a Ukrainian nationalist.

   The lean 18-year-old with steel-blue eyes claims to be a Kharkiv leader
   of the ultra-nationalist group Prava Molod (ГўВҖВңThe Right YouthГўВҖВқ).

   We met him as he trained a group of young men in handling military
   drones, his speciality. ГўВҖВңHard times make people stronger. Our era is
   producing strong people who will build a good country,ГўВҖВқ he declared.

   ItГўВҖВҷs not so simple for Kostiantyn Kosik, who is on medication for his
   tics, faintness and migraines. ГўВҖВңIГўВҖВҷm constantly nervous, on edge. ItГўВҖВҷs
   because of the war. It has a huge effect on my health,ГўВҖВқ said the
   bearded 18-year-old, who was dressed in black.

   Kostiantyn is from the Donetsk region, which has been ravaged by
   fighting since a Russia-backed separatist revolt in 2014. He grew up in
   Avdiivka, a martyr city now in ruins which fell under Russian control
   after months of grinding battles.

   ГўВҖВңI have known war since the age of six. At first it was very
   interesting for a little boy ГўВҖВ“ the tanks, soldiers, automatic weapons.
   When I was old enough to understand, it became much less fun,ГўВҖВқ he said.

   He spent weeks sheltering in the basement of his house as it was
   rattled by explosions, all the neighbours gone.

   ГўВҖВңIn one way it toughened me. But I would have preferred a normal
   childhood, with friends, with joy,ГўВҖВқ he said, his room decorated with a
   large painting of his hometown.

ГўВҖВҳThey Continue to DreamГўВҖВҷ

   Like most of the nearly four million displaced people within Ukraine,
   KostiantynГўВҖВҷs family are just about hanging on. They rent a house with
   no heating in Irpin near Kyiv. KostiantynГўВҖВҷs mother spends her days
   caring for his bedridden stepfather who has had a series of heart
   attacks linked to the conflict.

   Kostiantyn is proud to be studying international law at Irpin
   University and ГўВҖВ“ despite his broken English ГўВҖВ” wants to be able to work
   ГўВҖВңprotecting human rights, in Ukraine and elsewhere in the worldГўВҖВқ.

   Researchers for the WHO who questioned 24,000 young Ukrainians from 11
   to 17 at the end of 2023 found a ГўВҖВңdeterioration in the psychological
   wellbeingГўВҖВқ and ГўВҖВңsignificantГўВҖВқ decrease in the happiness they felt.

   But there was also a ГўВҖВңfairly high level of resilienceГўВҖВҰ to wartime
   adversity.ГўВҖВқ

   So much so that a UNICEF study in August reported that exams were more
   a source of stress to them than air raid sirens, which ГўВҖВңworryingly
   suggest that war has become part of everyday life for many children.ГўВҖВқ

   ГўВҖВңChildren have lost their parents, their friends and are sleeping in
   air raid shelters,ГўВҖВқ said Social Affairs Minister Uliutin. ГўВҖВңAnd yet they
   continue to live, to dream.ГўВҖВқ

   When Bogdan, the teenager from Balakliya, is not drawing he plays and
   chats with his ГўВҖВңnew friends,ГўВҖВқ all online. He spends a lot of time
   chatting with a girl called Lana, with whom ГўВҖВңhe has many things in
   common.ГўВҖВқ

   Bogdan also has a dream. ГўВҖВңI really want to meet up with Lana. I talked
   to my mother about it. Maybe our parents can arrange something.ГўВҖВқ But
   Lana lives in Dnipro, more than 400 kilometers (248 miles) to the
   southeast, another world in wartime Ukraine.

   In the meantime, Balakliya suffered another strike that killed three
   people on November 17, 300 metres from BogdanГўВҖВҷs building.
   ShareTweet
   Staff Writer with AFP

Staff Writer with AFP

Related Posts

   Children and families flee their neighborhoods amid fighting in
   Khartoum, Sudan
   Featured

UN Visit to SudanГўВҖВҷs El-Fasher Finds Traumatized Civilians in ГўВҖВҳUnsafe
ConditionsГўВҖВҷ

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 29, 2025

   A man holding a Venezuelan national flag during a protest against
   President Nicolas Maduro.
   Featured

Fearing War, Venezuelans Seek Comfort in Christmas Cheer

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 24, 2025

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.
   Featured

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 22, 2025

   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.
   Featured

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 19, 2025

   Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Bondi Beach
   Featured

Australia to Toughen Gun Laws After Deadly Bondi Shootings

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 15, 2025

   Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro leaves after offering a press
   conference in Caracas, Venezuela, on January 25, 2019
   Featured

US-Venezuela: From Sanctions to Military Action

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 12, 2025

   Next Post
   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   Please login to join discussion

Recommended

   Children and families flee their neighborhoods amid fighting in
   Khartoum, Sudan

UN Visit to SudanГўВҖВҷs El-Fasher Finds Traumatized Civilians in ГўВҖВҳUnsafe
ConditionsГўВҖВҷ

   December 29, 2025

   A man holding a Venezuelan national flag during a protest against
   President Nicolas Maduro.

Fearing War, Venezuelans Seek Comfort in Christmas Cheer

   December 24, 2025

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   December 22, 2025

   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   December 19, 2025

   Ukraine war

UkraineГўВҖВҷs Lost Generation Caught in ГўВҖВҳEternal LockdownГўВҖВҷ

   December 17, 2025

   Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Bondi Beach

Australia to Toughen Gun Laws After Deadly Bondi Shootings

   December 15, 2025

Opinion

   A trial COVID-19 vaccine

AmericaГўВҖВҷs Global Health Retreat Is a Gift to Its Rivals

   November 12, 2025

   Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu

UN Might Tolerate Netanyahu, and White House Might Welcome Him, But HeГўВҖВҷs
Still Guilty of Genocide

   September 30, 2025

   Former President Donald Trump speaks at a Fox News Town Hall

Cruelties Are US

   August 25, 2025

   Donald Trump

Fact vs. Fiction: The Trump AdministrationГўВҖВҷs Dubious War on Reverse
Discrimination

   June 18, 2025

   Tens of thousands of protestors shut down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan on
   Saturday, April 5, 2025, protesting the Trump administration's abuse of
   the separation of federal powers as well as the deep cuts to
   governmental services overseen by presidential advisor Elon Musk.

Civil Society Is Holding the Line. Will Washington Notice?

   June 17, 2025

   A Black Lives Matter mural in New York City.

Fuhgeddaboudit! AmericaГўВҖВҷs Erasure of History

   April 2, 2025
   Facebook Twitter

Newsletter

   Do you like our reporting?
   SUBSCRIBE

About Us

   The Globe Post

   The Globe Post is part of Globe Post Media, a U.S. digital news
   organization that is publishing the world's best targeted news sites.
   submit oped

   ГӮВ© 2018 The Globe Post

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
     * National
     * World
     * Business
     * Interviews
     * Lifestyle
     * Democracy at Risk
          + Media Freedom
     * Opinion
          + Editorials
          + Columns
          + Book Reviews
          + Stage
     * Submit Op-ed

   ГӮВ© 2018 The Globe Post
