    #The Globe Post » Feed The Globe Post » Comments Feed The Globe Post »
   Ukraine's Lost Generation Caught in `Eternal Lockdown' Comments Feed
   JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

     * About Us
     * Who Are We
     * Work With Us

   Sunday, January 4, 2026
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   The Globe Post
   39 °f
   New York
   44 ° Fri
   46 ° Sat
   40 ° Sun
   41 ° Mon
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   The Globe Post
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
   Home Featured

Ukraine's Lost Generation Caught in `Eternal Lockdown'

   Staff Writer with AFP by Staff Writer with AFP
   12/17/25
   in Featured, World
   Ukraine war

   An Ukranian soldier walks in Mala Rogan, east of Kharkiv, after
   Ukrainians reclaimed the village. Photo: Aris Messinis/AFP
   Share on FacebookShare on Twitter

   With his shadow of a moustache and baseball cap, Bogdan Levchikov would
   be your typical teenager anywhere if he didn't embody the tragedy of
   what has happened to a generation of young Ukrainians after nearly four
   years of war.

   His father Stanislav, a career soldier, was killed defending the
   country's second city Kharkiv just weeks after Russia invaded in 2022.
   On top of all they have been through, his mother Iryna, 50, was
   recently diagnosed with stage-three cancer of the uterus.

   Bogdan no longer knows anyone his age in his battered hometown of
   Balakliya, which was occupied by the Russian army from March to
   September 2022. It was later retaken by Ukrainian forces, but being
   only 70 kilometers (43 miles) from the front, is still regularly
   shelled.

   "My mother and I came back a few days after the city was liberated, and
   there were no children left, no shops open, nothing," he recalled. Only
   a fraction of the pre-war population of 26,000 have trickled back, and
   most of them are old.

   The skate park and the banks of the Balakliyka River where young people
   used to hang out were mined by the Russians. They have been demined
   since, "but rumour has it it's still not safe," the 15-year-old said.

   All Bogdan's schooling is online, his days punctuated by air raid
   alerts. The nine flights of stairs down to the basement is more than
   his sick mother can manage, so they lay a mattress in the small entry
   to their apartment, the only room without a window. "We've gotten used
   to getting by on our own. We're a tight team," Bogdan smiled.

   "It's not just Bogdan. All the children adapted so quickly," his mother
   said. "This generation - I don't know what to make of them..."

   She is not the only one to wonder what the war has done to Ukraine's
   children.

   Nearly a million young Ukrainians are still living in an eternal
   lockdown, doing either all or part of their lessons online. First there
   was the pandemic in March 2020, then the invasion - six years of
   spending most of their time in front of the family computer to study
   and unwind.

   This isolation is particularly felt in the Kharkiv region bordering
   Russia, which is the target of daily attacks.

   A few bars and restaurants stay open until the 11 pm curfew before
   night brings the inevitable Russian drone and missile attacks. Mornings
   echo with the sound of volunteer teams repairing whatever can be
   salvaged.

   Some 843 educational establishments have been either destroyed or
   damaged in the region - a fifth of the national toll, according to the
   Ukrainian government's saveschools.in.ua. site.

   The online investigative site Bellingcat - with whom AFP journalists in
   Kyiv and Paris worked on this special report - has logged more than 100
   video or photo testimonies on social media of Russian strikes on or
   close to educational institutions or youth leisure facilities in and
   around Kharkiv.

   Children in tears were evacuated when a city centre daycare was hit on
   October 22. "We're going to find your mother right away," a rescuer
   told a little girl he was carrying out of the smoke and debris,
   according to police footage.

Underground Schools

   More and more children are going to underground schools in the city.
   Yevangelina Tuturiko has been attending one since September, several
   meters below the street with no natural light.

   "I really love it," the lanky 14-year-old said, "because I can talk in
   person with my classmates again."

   Ironically, Yevangelina had to cross Europe to "meet most of my current
   friends" in Kharkiv after being invited on a "respite trip" organised
   by the city of Lille in northern France to give Ukrainian kids a taste
   of normality.

   Kharkiv will have 10 underground schools open by the end of the year,
   the city hall said.

   Priority is given to classes where most of the children remained in
   Kharkiv during the heaviest of the fighting at the start of the
   invasion, when Russian forces pushed into the suburbs of the city. Some
   70 percent of the city's children were evacuated at one time or
   another, either abroad or to the west of Ukraine.

   The children spend only half their school day in the bunkers to make
   room for others, finishing their classes online.

   The school AFP visited was built to nuclear shelter standards, with a
   heavy armored door. "We are probably one of the safest shelters in all
   of Ukraine," its principal Natalia Teplova said proudly.

`Children Going Mad'

   All outdoor school sports are banned in the Kharkiv region for fear of
   Russian strikes. But outside school it's a little more hazy.

   "Official competitions are banned, but we're not state-run, so we make
   do on our own," said football coach and former soldier Oleksandr
   Andrushchenko as he roared on his young players.

   The handful of well-wrapped up parents on the sidelines "understand
   that their children haven't developed at all (athletically) since the
   Covid years. And that it's better for them to play football... than
   stay glued to their phones," he said.

   Inside Kharkiv's largest swimming pool complex, educator Ayuna Morozova
   agrees: "You can't live in constant fear."

   The huge Soviet-era brutalist building shut after being hit in two
   heavy strikes in March 2022, then reopened in May 2024. Now when
   windows are blown out from the shock waves of nearby bombing, they are
   just boarded up with plywood or plastic.

   "Water and swimming cure everything," Morozova firmly believes. "First
   two years of Covid, then four years of war - children are going mad,"
   she said. The complex is now also home to a water therapy space for
   amputee soldiers.

   With her flame-red hair and warm manner, Ayuna lives up to her
   Tatar-origin first name, which means "Great Bear". But like almost
   everyone AFP met, the wounds of war surface quickly. She was buried
   under rubble after an airstrike on a public building in 2022. "I still
   have nightmares," she said. "I avoid confined spaces and lifts. And
   yes, I did see a psychologist."

   Ukraine lacks the resources to measure the war's impact on the young.

   "We don't have enough psychologists," admitted Oksana Zbitnieva, head
   of the government's coordination center for mental health. To try to
   make up for that, "130,000 frontline health professionals -- nurses,
   pediatricians, family doctors - have received World Health
   Organization-certified training in mental health," she said.

   While "some countries have been building their (mental health) systems
   for 50 years, we were the last to get started because of our Soviet
   legacy," she added.

   The government has opened 326 "resilience centers" for children and
   parents across the country, and "300 more" should be built next year,
   according to Social Affairs Minister Denys Uliutin.

Self-Harm

   When AFP met psychologist Maryna Dudnyk amid the sunflower fields of
   Khorosheve, south of Kharkiv, she had just led three hours of play
   workshops with around 50 children aged six to 11 to help them express
   their feelings.

   As her team packed away the bulletproof vests - security protocol
   demands they bring them - she said "the war has had a huge impact on
   the emotional state of young people, we all live under stress."

   In her consulting room, she hears "a lot of fear and anxiety in
   children... Teenagers suffer from self-harm, from suicidal thoughts."

   Dudnyk, 50, who works for the Ukrainian NGO "Voices of Children", also
   carries her own wounds - fleeing from her hometown Mariupol, which was
   occupied by the Russian army after a brutal siege. "We no longer have a
   home, nothing. Everything was destroyed."

   Some teenagers have grown a kind of emotional armour. Illia Isayev
   hated it when his family fled the fighting by crossing over into
   Russia. The months they spent there before returning made him even more
   of a Ukrainian nationalist.

   The lean 18-year-old with steel-blue eyes claims to be a Kharkiv leader
   of the ultra-nationalist group Prava Molod ("The Right Youth").

   We met him as he trained a group of young men in handling military
   drones, his speciality. "Hard times make people stronger. Our era is
   producing strong people who will build a good country," he declared.

   It's not so simple for Kostiantyn Kosik, who is on medication for his
   tics, faintness and migraines. "I'm constantly nervous, on edge. It's
   because of the war. It has a huge effect on my health," said the
   bearded 18-year-old, who was dressed in black.

   Kostiantyn is from the Donetsk region, which has been ravaged by
   fighting since a Russia-backed separatist revolt in 2014. He grew up in
   Avdiivka, a martyr city now in ruins which fell under Russian control
   after months of grinding battles.

   "I have known war since the age of six. At first it was very
   interesting for a little boy - the tanks, soldiers, automatic weapons.
   When I was old enough to understand, it became much less fun," he said.

   He spent weeks sheltering in the basement of his house as it was
   rattled by explosions, all the neighbours gone.

   "In one way it toughened me. But I would have preferred a normal
   childhood, with friends, with joy," he said, his room decorated with a
   large painting of his hometown.

`They Continue to Dream'

   Like most of the nearly four million displaced people within Ukraine,
   Kostiantyn's family are just about hanging on. They rent a house with
   no heating in Irpin near Kyiv. Kostiantyn's mother spends her days
   caring for his bedridden stepfather who has had a series of heart
   attacks linked to the conflict.

   Kostiantyn is proud to be studying international law at Irpin
   University and - despite his broken English -- wants to be able to work
   "protecting human rights, in Ukraine and elsewhere in the world".

   Researchers for the WHO who questioned 24,000 young Ukrainians from 11
   to 17 at the end of 2023 found a "deterioration in the psychological
   wellbeing" and "significant" decrease in the happiness they felt.

   But there was also a "fairly high level of resilience... to wartime
   adversity."

   So much so that a UNICEF study in August reported that exams were more
   a source of stress to them than air raid sirens, which "worryingly
   suggest that war has become part of everyday life for many children."

   "Children have lost their parents, their friends and are sleeping in
   air raid shelters," said Social Affairs Minister Uliutin. "And yet they
   continue to live, to dream."

   When Bogdan, the teenager from Balakliya, is not drawing he plays and
   chats with his "new friends," all online. He spends a lot of time
   chatting with a girl called Lana, with whom "he has many things in
   common."

   Bogdan also has a dream. "I really want to meet up with Lana. I talked
   to my mother about it. Maybe our parents can arrange something." But
   Lana lives in Dnipro, more than 400 kilometers (248 miles) to the
   southeast, another world in wartime Ukraine.

   In the meantime, Balakliya suffered another strike that killed three
   people on November 17, 300 metres from Bogdan's building.
   ShareTweet
   Staff Writer with AFP

Staff Writer with AFP

Related Posts

   Children and families flee their neighborhoods amid fighting in
   Khartoum, Sudan
   Featured

UN Visit to Sudan's El-Fasher Finds Traumatized Civilians in `Unsafe
Conditions'

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 29, 2025

   A man holding a Venezuelan national flag during a protest against
   President Nicolas Maduro.
   Featured

Fearing War, Venezuelans Seek Comfort in Christmas Cheer

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 24, 2025

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.
   Featured

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 22, 2025

   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.
   Featured

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 19, 2025

   Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Bondi Beach
   Featured

Australia to Toughen Gun Laws After Deadly Bondi Shootings

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 15, 2025

   Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro leaves after offering a press
   conference in Caracas, Venezuela, on January 25, 2019
   Featured

US-Venezuela: From Sanctions to Military Action

   by Staff Writer with AFP
   December 12, 2025

   Next Post
   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   Please login to join discussion

Recommended

   Children and families flee their neighborhoods amid fighting in
   Khartoum, Sudan

UN Visit to Sudan's El-Fasher Finds Traumatized Civilians in `Unsafe
Conditions'

   December 29, 2025

   A man holding a Venezuelan national flag during a protest against
   President Nicolas Maduro.

Fearing War, Venezuelans Seek Comfort in Christmas Cheer

   December 24, 2025

   US President Donald Trump during a press conference.

Trump Administration Denies Cover-up Over Redacted Epstein Files

   December 22, 2025

   A hungry young boy eats raw noodles as dislocated Palestinians carry
   the humanitarian aid they have received from a United Nations
   distribution point in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip on May 27, 2025.

Over 1,000 Patients Have Died Awaiting Evacuation From Gaza Since July 2024:
WHO

   December 19, 2025

   Ukraine war

Ukraine's Lost Generation Caught in `Eternal Lockdown'

   December 17, 2025

   Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Bondi Beach

Australia to Toughen Gun Laws After Deadly Bondi Shootings

   December 15, 2025

Opinion

   A trial COVID-19 vaccine

America's Global Health Retreat Is a Gift to Its Rivals

   November 12, 2025

   Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu

UN Might Tolerate Netanyahu, and White House Might Welcome Him, But He's
Still Guilty of Genocide

   September 30, 2025

   Former President Donald Trump speaks at a Fox News Town Hall

Cruelties Are US

   August 25, 2025

   Donald Trump

Fact vs. Fiction: The Trump Administration's Dubious War on Reverse
Discrimination

   June 18, 2025

   Tens of thousands of protestors shut down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan on
   Saturday, April 5, 2025, protesting the Trump administration's abuse of
   the separation of federal powers as well as the deep cuts to
   governmental services overseen by presidential advisor Elon Musk.

Civil Society Is Holding the Line. Will Washington Notice?

   June 17, 2025

   A Black Lives Matter mural in New York City.

Fuhgeddaboudit! America's Erasure of History

   April 2, 2025
   Facebook Twitter

Newsletter

   Do you like our reporting?
   SUBSCRIBE

About Us

   The Globe Post

   The Globe Post is part of Globe Post Media, a U.S. digital news
   organization that is publishing the world's best targeted news sites.
   submit oped

   © 2018 The Globe Post

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   No Result
   View All Result
     * National
     * World
     * Business
     * Interviews
     * Lifestyle
     * Democracy at Risk
          + Media Freedom
     * Opinion
          + Editorials
          + Columns
          + Book Reviews
          + Stage
     * Submit Op-ed

   © 2018 The Globe Post
