
   IMF Blog Logo
   (BUTTON)
     * Chart of the Week
     * Regions
     * Topics
     * Authors
     * Archive
     * IMF Home

   Credit (Photo: WILLY KURNIAWAN/REUTERS/Newscom)

   Credit (Photo: WILLY KURNIAWAN/REUTERS/Newscom)
   (BUTTON) English
   a+l+e+r+b+y+tm
   español
   russkij
   ¥¬
   português
   français
   ­
   Health

The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since the Great Depression
(BUTTON)

   (BUTTON)

The world has changed dramatically in the three months since our last update
of the World Economic Outlook in January. A rare disaster, a coronavirus
pandemic, has resulted in a tragically large number of human lives being
lost.

   Gita Gopinath
   April 14, 2020

   As countries implement necessary quarantines and social distancing
   practices to contain the pandemic, the world has been put in a Great
   Lockdown. The magnitude and speed of collapse in activity that has
   followed is unlike anything experienced in our lifetimes.

   April World Economic Outlook projects global growth in 2020 to fall to
   -3 percent.

   This is a crisis like no other, and there is substantial uncertainty
   about its impact on people's lives and livelihoods. A lot depends on
   the epidemiology of the virus, the effectiveness of containment
   measures, and the development of therapeutics and vaccines, all of
   which are hard to predict. In addition, many countries now face
   multiple crises--a health crisis, a financial crisis, and a collapse in
   commodity prices, which interact in complex ways. Policymakers are
   providing unprecedented support to households, firms, and financial
   markets, and, while this is crucial for a strong recovery, there is
   considerable uncertainty about what the economic landscape will look
   like when we emerge from this lockdown.

   Under the assumption that the pandemic and required containment peaks
   in the second quarter for most countries in the world, and recedes in
   the second half of this year, in the April World Economic Outlook we
   project global growth in 2020 to fall to -3 percent. This is a
   downgrade of 6.3 percentage points from January 2020, a major revision
   over a very short period. This makes the Great Lockdown the worst
   recession since the Great Depression, and far worse than the Global
   Financial Crisis.

   Assuming the pandemic fades in the second half of 2020 and that policy
   actions taken around the world are effective in preventing widespread
   firm bankruptcies, extended job losses, and system-wide financial
   strains, we project global growth in 2021 to rebound to 5.8 percent.

   This recovery in 2021 is only partial as the level of economic activity
   is projected to remain below the level we had projected for 2021,
   before the virus hit. The cumulative loss to global GDP over 2020 and
   2021 from the pandemic crisis could be around 9 trillion dollars,
   greater than the economies of Japan and Germany, combined.

   This is a truly global crisis as no country is spared. Countries
   reliant on tourism, travel, hospitality, and entertainment for their
   growth are experiencing particularly large disruptions. Emerging market
   and developing economies face additional challenges with unprecedented
   reversals in capital flows as global risk appetite wanes, and currency
   pressures, while coping with weaker health systems, and more limited
   fiscal space to provide support. Moreover, several economies entered
   this crisis in a vulnerable state with sluggish growth and high debt
   levels.

   For the first time since the Great Depression both advanced economies
   and emerging market and developing economies are in recession. For this
   year, growth in advanced economies is projected at -6.1 percent.
   Emerging market and developing economies with normal growth levels well
   above advanced economies are also projected to have negative growth
   rates of -1.0 percent in 2020, and -2.2 percent if you exclude China.
   Income per capita is projected to shrink for over 170 countries. Both
   advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies are
   expected to partially recover in 2021.

   Alternative adverse scenarios

   What I have described is a baseline scenario but, given the extreme
   uncertainty around the duration and intensity of the health crisis, we
   also explore alternative, more adverse scenarios. The pandemic may not
   recede in the second half of this year, leading to longer durations of
   containment, worsening financial conditions, and further breakdowns of
   global supply chains. In such cases, global GDP would fall even
   further: an additional 3 percent in 2020 if the pandemic is more
   protracted this year, while, if the pandemic continues into 2021, it
   may fall next year by an additional 8 percent compared to our baseline
   scenario.

   Exceptional policy actions

   Flattening the spread of COVID-19 using lockdowns allows health systems
   to cope with the disease, which then permits a resumption of economic
   activity. In this sense, there is no trade-off between saving lives and
   saving livelihoods. Countries should continue to spend generously on
   their health systems, perform widespread testing, and refrain from
   trade restrictions on medical supplies. A global effort must ensure
   that when therapies and vaccines are developed both rich and poor
   nations alike have immediate access.

   While the economy is shut down, policymakers will need to ensure that
   people are able to meet their needs and that businesses can pick up
   once the acute phases of the pandemic pass. The large, timely, and
   targeted, fiscal, monetary, and financial policies already taken by
   many policymakers--including credit guarantees, liquidity facilities,
   loan forbearance, expanded unemployment insurance, enhanced benefits,
   and tax relief--have been lifelines to households and businesses. This
   support should continue throughout the containment phase to minimize
   persistent scars that could emerge from subdued investment and job
   losses in this severe downturn.

   Policymakers must also plan for the recovery. As containment measures
   come off, policies should shift swiftly to supporting demand,
   incentivizing firm hiring, and repairing balance sheets in the private
   and public sector to aid the recovery. Fiscal stimulus that is
   coordinated across countries with fiscal space will magnify the benefit
   for all economies. Moratoria on debt repayments and debt restructuring
   may need to be continued during the recovery phase.

   Multilateral cooperation is vital to the health of the global recovery.
   To support needed spending in developing countries, bilateral creditors
   and international financial institutions should provide concessional
   financing, grants, and debt relief. The activation and establishment of
   swap lines between major central banks has helped ease shortages in
   international liquidity, and may need to be expanded to more economies.
   Collaborative effort is needed to ensure that the world does not
   de-globalize, so the recovery is not damaged by further losses to
   productivity.

   At the International Monetary Fund, we are actively deploying our
   1-trillion-dollar lending capacity to support vulnerable countries,
   including through rapid-disbursing emergency financing and debt service
   relief to our poorest member countries, and we are calling on official
   bilateral creditors to do the same.

   There are some hopeful signs that this health crisis will end.
   Countries are succeeding in containing the virus using
   social-distancing practices, testing, and contact tracing, at least for
   now, and treatments and vaccines may develop sooner than expected.

   In the meantime, we face tremendous uncertainty around what comes next.
   Commensurate with the scale and speed of the crisis, domestic and
   international policy responses need to be large, rapidly deployed, and
   speedily recalibrated as new data becomes available. The courageous
   actions of doctors and nurses need to be matched by policymakers all
   over the world so we can jointly overcome this crisis.


Recent Blogs

   What COVID-19 Can Teach Us About Mitigating Climate Change
   Health

What COVID-19 Can Teach Us About Mitigating Climate Change

   July 9, 2021
   Sub-Saharan Africa: We Need to Act Now
   Health
   A

Sub-Saharan Africa: We Need to Act Now

   June 28, 2021
   COVID's Long Shadow: Social Repercussions of Pandemics
   Health
   A

COVID's Long Shadow: Social Repercussions of Pandemics

   February 3, 2021

ABOUT THE BLOG

   IMFBlog is a forum for the views of the International Monetary Fund
   (IMF) staff and officials on pressing economic and policy issues of the
   day. The IMF, based in Washington D.C., is an organization of 191
   countries, working to foster global monetary cooperation and financial
   stability around the world. The views expressed are those of the
   author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF and its
   Executive Board. Read More
     * ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
     * DIGITAL MONEY
     * FINANCIAL SECTOR STABILITY

     * GLOBAL ECONOMY
     * FINANCIAL MARKET
     * FISCAL AFFAIRS

     * MONETARY POLICY
     * PEOPLE
     * IMF HOME PAGE

   © 2025 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
